Category,Question,Answer
Plastic Use,How can I reduce plastic use at home?,"Switch to reusable bags, bottles, and containers. Avoid single-use cutlery and opt for metal or bamboo alternatives."
Plastic Use,What are the best alternatives to plastic wrap?,"Beeswax wraps, silicone lids, and reusable containers are eco-friendly replacements for plastic wrap."
Plastic Use,How can I avoid microplastics?,"Use natural fabrics instead of synthetics, avoid single-use plastics, and install a filter on washing machines to catch microfibers."
Plastic Use,How can I store food without plastic?,"Use glass jars, steel boxes, ceramic containers, or beeswax wraps instead of plastic containers."
Plastic Use,What eco-friendly options exist for shopping?,"Bring your own cloth bags, use bulk stores, and avoid products with excess packaging."
Energy,What are simple ways to save electricity?,"Turn off appliances when not in use, switch to LED lights, and use energy-efficient devices."
Energy,How can I reduce my AC power consumption?,"Set the AC at 24–26°C, ensure proper insulation, and use ceiling fans to circulate cool air."
Energy,What are renewable energy options for households?,"Solar panels, small-scale wind turbines, and purchasing green energy from your provider are common options."
Energy,How can I reduce energy bills naturally?,"Use daylight, improve ventilation, and insulate walls and roofs to reduce cooling and heating needs."
Energy,What is phantom energy consumption?,"It’s electricity used by devices in standby mode. Unplug chargers and appliances to prevent waste."
Travel,What are eco-friendly travel options in cities?,"Use public transport, cycling, carpooling, or electric vehicles to reduce emissions."
Travel,How can I reduce carbon footprint while traveling?,"Opt for trains over flights for short trips, pack light, and choose eco-certified hotels."
Travel,What is green tourism?,"Tourism focused on minimizing environmental impact and supporting local communities and conservation."
Travel,What are eco-friendly long-distance travel tips?,"Choose direct flights, pack reusable bottles, and offset your carbon emissions."
Travel,What is slow travel?,"Traveling at a slower pace, staying longer in one place, and reducing transportation emissions."
Water,How to conserve water at home?,"Fix leaks, install low-flow taps, collect rainwater, and avoid running taps unnecessarily."
Water,What is greywater reuse?,"Greywater is gently used water from sinks, showers, or laundry that can be treated and reused for gardening or flushing."
Water,How can I reduce water use in the kitchen?,"Wash vegetables in a bowl, run dishwashers only when full, and reuse cooking water for plants."
Water,What is rainwater harvesting?,"It’s collecting and storing rainwater for later use, reducing dependency on groundwater."
Water,How to conserve water while gardening?,"Water plants early morning or evening, use drip irrigation, and mulch soil to retain moisture."
Waste,What is the best way to start composting?,"Use a compost bin to collect kitchen scraps like fruit peels, vegetable waste, and coffee grounds. Mix with dry leaves for balance."
Waste,How to dispose of e-waste responsibly?,"Drop old electronics at authorized e-waste collection centers or recycling points in your city."
Waste,What is zero waste lifestyle?,"It’s a lifestyle aiming to minimize waste through reusing, recycling, composting, and refusing unnecessary products."
Waste,How to reduce packaging waste?,"Buy in bulk, choose minimal packaging, and bring your own containers to stores."
Waste,What is biodegradable waste?,"Organic material like food scraps, paper, and leaves that decompose naturally."
Global Warming,What causes global warming?,"Excess greenhouse gases like CO2, methane, and nitrous oxide trap heat in the Earth’s atmosphere."
Global Warming,What daily actions reduce greenhouse gases?,"Use energy-efficient appliances, drive less, reduce meat consumption, and support renewable energy."
Global Warming,What is the greenhouse effect?,"It’s the natural process of heat being trapped by greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Human activity has intensified it."
Global Warming,What is climate change adaptation?,"Adjusting practices to reduce harm from climate change impacts like floods, droughts, and heatwaves."
Global Warming,How can we prevent climate change?,"Switch to renewable energy, conserve resources, protect forests, and reduce fossil fuel use."
Awareness,What is carbon footprint?,"It’s the total amount of greenhouse gases generated by your actions, measured in CO2 equivalents."
Awareness,What are carbon offsets?,"Carbon offsets are credits you purchase to compensate for your emissions by funding projects that reduce or capture emissions."
Awareness,What is greenwashing?,"When companies falsely advertise products as eco-friendly without real sustainable practices."
Awareness,What is sustainable development?,"Development that meets present needs without compromising future generations’ ability to meet theirs."
Awareness,What is ESG?,"Environmental, Social, and Governance — a framework to measure sustainability and ethical impact."
Government Schemes,What is the Swachh Bharat Mission?,"An Indian government initiative to clean streets, roads, and infrastructure, promoting waste segregation and sanitation."
Government Schemes,What is the Energy Efficiency Financing Platform?,"A program to provide financial support for energy-efficient projects in India."
Government Schemes,What is the National Electric Mobility Mission?,"An Indian initiative to promote electric vehicles and hybrid technology."
Government Schemes,What is the Plastic Waste Management Rules 2016?,"Rules that regulate plastic waste generation, mandate producer responsibility, and promote recycling."
Government Schemes,What is the National Solar Mission?,"An Indian government mission to promote solar power, reduce carbon emissions, and increase renewable energy adoption."
Lifestyle,How can I adopt a greener lifestyle easily?,"Start with small changes like reusable bottles, cycling, plant-based meals, and switching to eco-friendly cleaning products."
Lifestyle,What are eco-friendly cleaning tips?,"Use vinegar, lemon, and baking soda as natural cleaning agents instead of chemical-based cleaners."
Lifestyle,How can I make my wardrobe sustainable?,"Buy fewer clothes, choose organic fabrics, recycle old garments, and support ethical brands."
Lifestyle,How can I make my office eco-friendly?,"Use digital documents, energy-efficient lighting, and reusable office supplies."
Lifestyle,What are small eco-habits with big impact?,"Carry a reusable water bottle, switch off unused devices, and avoid single-use plastics."
...